So the section we're gonna be kicking
off right now is on watchers and
computed properties.
We've talked a lot about reactive data and
we saw that it's cool that it tracks,
but the next step to reactive data a lot
of times comes to the point where it's
a question of what happens when
things depend on that data, right?
So you want something to happen
when the reactive data changes,
this is actually fairly common.
So granted we're doing a lot of things
automatically at this point, right, so for
example, when the data updates view
will automatically update the HTML,
but what do we wanna do
more fine grained things.
So for example, we wanna say,
we wanna watch the count up here,
and if it's even,
we want to go ahead and then say,
update the title up here
to something else, right?
So you can imagine that if we had
this to be counterTitle, for example.
And counterTitle would just put it here.
So counterTitle is going to be, this is
standard, for example, so we and refresh.
Great, Counter Standard here.
And we wanna say, we wanna watch for,
if the count goes past 20,
then we wanna add like long to the text.
And so your first instinct for
those who come from a framework background
is to think, well, we need to be
able to watch the thing, right?
And so to watch something in
view is actually fairly simple.
There actually is a watch
option as you would expect.
So you have data, we have methods,
here's our opportunity to watch something.
And when you wanna watch something,
you basically say,
what is it exactly that we're watching?
Well, in this case,
we're watching the count.
And so when you actually define the count
though, what you wanna do is you wanna
say you need the value that is basically
going to return to you by default cuz
otherwise you don't have something
to refer to inside of that value.
Cuz it's gonna basically say, what
your new value, what's your old value?
And so by default,
you get the new value as the first one so
I'm actually just do
a new value like this.
So you'll see now, here we have a simple
watch function that's watching count.
And then when it changes,
we should automatically see it log.
And so watch count, they're now refresh.
Refreshing would be helpful.
There we go, okay.
So we can see here 1826, we're getting
some loss as well here from increment
count, but
we see that at least it's being triggered.
So your next thing would be like okay,
well logically speaking,
what I would wanna do then is I would say,
well,
if new value is greater than 20,
then this dot counter title.
Counter title plus equals very long, okay.
Now, refresh 1, 2,
you can see boom, it's updated.
And so from a mental model perspective,
you're like, yeah, that makes sense, cool.
And so this is actually a common paradigm
in a lot of frameworks when it comes
to watching reactive dependencies.
That's what it's called.
But view has a better way for
us to do this,
especially when it comes
to modifying existing data.
Because if you think about what we're
doing here, what we're doing is we're
saying based on a reactive data property,
run a specific computation.
And then, but we think about that
from a performance perspective,
we really only wanted to do
that when all the dependencies,
like the right dependencies are triggered.
And so one of the problems that
comes with doing something as like
explicitly watching values is sometimes
especially when apps get really large.
The watch can end up getting triggered
a lot, like unnecessarily so.
And so when you hear things about people
accidentally triggering re renders,
that's what they're talking about.
It's because at that point, you're
manually watching the dependencies and
if you don't know what you're doing,
we're not cashing it correctly.
All of a sudden you might be triggering
re-rendering of thousands of nodes and
wattnode.
So view in its view version came up
with an API that would help to abstract
that away.
And the way it does that is through
the idea of computer properties.
Nice so the way computer properties work
is basically another option on your app.
So I'm gonna add it below data because and
you'll see shortly why.
So computer properties is, think of
it as basically performance optimized
calculations on reactive
data that you have.
So in the instance of, for
example, the counter title, right?
Rather than it be like okay, well,
I'm gonna have a watch on this count,
if it's 20, then add the thing.
Instead, you could be, I'll say,
display title for example.
And so this will be a function
that view will basically,
it will correctly decide when to run it.
So we'll see shortly.
And in this function,
what are we gonna do?
We're gonna say, if this.count is greater
than 20, return counter standard.
Otherwise return, wait.
In this case it was counter very long.
Otherwise, return counter standard,
just like that.
And so if we switch this over now to do,
do, do, do display title.
And refresh.
You see nothing changes, and
then it's swapped and then it's good.
And basically, even though you
might think programmatically,
this looks very similar
to what we just did.
This is extremely powerful because what
you've just done is now given view the job
of figuring out when its
dependencies have changed.
And so to show you what I
mean by that we could even
combine computed properties together.
So for example, let's say that we actually
wanted to impact the increment amount
based on the length of the title.
Let's just do that.
So we could then say, see,
as I call it, optimizedIncrementAmount.
And for whatever reason,
we have some algorithm that's
dependent on the counter title.
What we could do instead,
we can return this.countertitle or
sorry, this.displayTitle.length times,
and then let's say this incrementAmount.
So now, we have two dependencies.
We're depending on this displayTitle here,
we're de depending on
incrementAmount here.
But then, once we update here
to optimize increment amount,
we can see now that things are starting to
change actually pretty drastically, right?
You're seeing that the actually,
I've realized you're not actually
seeing the optimized amount.
So let's show that real quick.
Where's my incrementCount, okay.
Here we go.
Then we can say optimizedIncrementAmount.
Very good.
So you see here's 224 right here.
And so it's changing because, why?
Because we've modified the title.
If we modify this times 10,
you'll see that now it's updating
correctly by the incrementAmount, but
the optimize amount is not
dependent on two different things.
And so what you get with computer
properties is basically really efficient
tool chaining on reactive dependencies.
And this is a concept we're
starting to see popularized,
I think spelt has something
very similar as well now.
In that, if you think about an enterprise
level app, there's going to be so
much that's changing.
And when you have manual definitions
of what you're watching,
oftentimes you'll find that
it's actually fairly brittle,
because one small change will break
that entire dependency chain.
Whereas here, you can have your source
of truth being this data store, and
then you can have all your
computations run off of that thing.
Right, and it knows when to trigger, it
knows what to do, it knows how to cache it
so that in the HTML, it doesn't randomly
trigger like, all that stuff that our goal
is to build cool things and to abstract
business logic deliver value to customers.
As much as it's fun to learn
about performance optimizations,
that's not something we want
to be debugging constantly.
And so computed properties
are incredibly powerful for this.
In fact, if I were to say my single
most favorite feature of view,
it's the computed property cuz it
just takes away all the worry for
me about what's happening.
And it does so much work for
me again, really easy.
And it's particularly powerful if you
do any data visualizations you can
imagine, right?
You're doing all these SVG calculations
based on a set group of data.
You don't wanna have to write the
dependency chain that would update the SVG
at this particular point, and then it
swaps this way, or how it animates,
all of that can be managed
basically with computed properties.
And so some of the most elegant stores
I've seen have one source of truth inside
of data, and
then they compute everything else out.
And it works really, really well because
view can optimize all those things.